*Trap* is a generic term for three kinds of situations: system call, exception and device interrupt. A trap causes the CPU to set aside ordinary execution of instructions and force a transfer of control to special code that handles the event.

Xv6 handles all traps in the kernel. Traps are not delivered to user code. 

Kernel code (assembler or C) that processes a trap is often called a *handler*. The first handler instructions are usually written in assembler (rather than C) and are sometimes called a *vector*.

## 4.1 RISC-V trap machinery

Here is an outline of the most important registers:

- *stvec*. The kernel writes the address of its trap handler here. The RISC-V jumps to the address in `stvec` to handle a trap. 
- *sepc*. When a trap occurs, RISC-V saves the program counter here, since pc is then overwritten with the value in `stvec`. 
- *scause*. RISC-V puts a number here to describe the reason for the trap. 
- *sscratch*. It holds a pointer to the trapframe.
- *sstatus*. The SIE bit in `sstatus` controls whether device interrupts are enabled. If the kernel clears SIE, the RISC-V will defer device interrupt until the kernel sets SIE. The SPP bit indicates whether a trap comes from user mode or supervisor mode, and controls to what mode `sret` returns. 

The above registers relate to traps handled in supervisor mode, and they can not be read or written in user mode. 

When it needs to force a trap, the RISC-V hardware does the following for all trap types (other than timer interrupts):

1. If the trap is a device interrupt and the `sstatus` SIE bit is clear, defer device interrupt until the kernel sets SIE.

2. Disable interrupts by clearing SIE bit in `sstatus`. 
3. Copy the pc to `sepc`.
4. Save the current mode (user or supervisor) in the SPP bit in `sstatus`. 
5. Set `scause` to reflect the trap's cause.
6. Set the mode to supervisor, since trap only runs in supervisor mode.
7. Copy `stvec` to pc, so the pc now points to the trap handler. 
8. Start executing at the new pc. 

Note that the CPU doesn't switch to kernel page table, doesn't switch to a stack in the kernel, and doesn't save any registers other than pc. Kernel Software must perform these tasks. 

## 4.2 Traps from user space

A major constraint on the design of xv6's trap handling is the fact that RISC-V hardware doesn't switch page tables when it forces a trap. This means that the trap handler address in `stvec` must have a valid mapping in user page table, since it is the page table in force when the trap handling code start executing. 

Furthermore, xv6's trap handling code needs to switch to the kernel page table. In order to continue executing after that switch, the kernel page table must also have a mapping for the trap handler pointed by `stvec`.

Xv6 satisfies these requirement using a *trampoline* page. A trampoline page consists of a carefully designed sequence of instructions (`uservec`) that `stvec` points to. 

The trampoline page is mapped in every process's page table at address `TRAMPOLINE`, which is at the end of the virtual address space.

Before entering user space, the kernel set `sscratch` to point to a per-process trapframe structure that has space to save the 32 user registers. When creating each process, xv6 allocates a page for the process's trapframe, and maps it to the user virtual address `TRAPFRAME`, which is just below the `TRAMPOLINE`.

## 4.5 Traps from kernel space

Kernel trap is prepared for two kinds of traps: device interrupts and exceptions. It calls `devintr` to check for and handle the former. If the trap isn't a device interrupt, it must be an exception, and this is always a fatal error if it occurs in the xv6 kernel. The kernel calls `panic` and stops executing. 

If kernel trap was called due to a timer interrupt, and a process's kernel thread is running, kernel trap calls `yeild` to give other threads a chance to run.

The RISC-V always disables interrupts when it starts to take a trap, and xv6 doesn't enable them again until after it set `stvec`. 

## 4.6 Page-fault exceptions

**COW fork**

Many kernels use page faults to implement *copy-on-write (COW) fork*.

Parent and child can safely share physical memory by appropriate use of page table permissions and page faults. The `scause` register indicates the type of the page fault and the `stval` register contains the address that couldn't be translated.

The basic plan in COW fork is for the parent and child to initially share all physical pages, but for each to map them read-only (with the `PTE_W` flag clear). If either writes a shared page, the RISC-V CPU raises a page-fault exception and then:

1. The kernel's trap handler responds by allocating a new page of physical memory and copying into it the physical page that the faulted address maps to.
2. The kernel changes the relevant PTE in the faulting process's page table to point to the copy and allow reads as well as writes.
3. The control flow of faulting process will be resumed.

An important optimization: if a process incurs a store page fault and the physical page is only referred to from that process's page table, no copy is needed.

**Lazy allocation**

Another widely-used feature is called lazy allocation, which has two parts. First, when an application asks for more memory by calling `sbrk`, the kernel notes the increase in size, but does not allocate physical memory and does not create PTEs for the new range of virtual addresses. Second, on a page fault on one of those new addresses, the kernel allocates a page of physical memory and maps it into the page table.

**Paging area**

The programs running on a computer may need more memory than the computer has RAM. To cope gracefully, the operating system may implement paging to disk. The idea is to store only a fraction of user pages in RAM, and to store the rest on disk in a *paging area*. 

Eviction is expensive, so paging performs best if it’s infrequent: if applications use only a subset of their memory pages and the union of the subsets fits in RAM. This property is often referred to as having good locality of reference. 