A *driver* is the code in an operating system that manages a particular device: it configures device hardware, tells the device to perform operations, handles the resulting interrupt, and interacts with the processes that may be waiting for I/O from the device.

Devices that need attention from the operating system can usually be configured to generate interrupts, which are one type of trap.

Many device drivers can execute code in two contexts: a *top half* that runs in a process's kernel thread, and a *bottom half* that executes at interrupt time.

 ## 5.1 Code: Console input

The UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter) hardware appears to software as a set of *memory-mapped* control registers. That is, there are some physical addresses that RISC-V hardware connects to the UART device, so that loads and stores interact with the device hardware rather than RAM.

For example, the `LSR` register contain bits that indicate whether input characters are waiting to be read by software. These characters are available for reading the `RHR` register. Each time one is read, the UART hardware deletes it from an internal FIFO of waiting characters, and clear clears the ready bit in `LSR` when the FIFO is empty.

`uartinit` configures the UART to generate a receive interrupt when the UART receives each byte of input, and a *transmit complete* interrupt each time the UART finishes sending a byte of output.

`consoleread` waits for input to arrive (via interrupts) and be buffered in `cons.buf`, copies the input to user space, and (after a whole line has arrived) returns to the user process.

```c
// consoleread
...
acquire(&cons.lock);
while(n > 0){
  // wait until interrupt handler has put some
  // input into cons.buffer.
  while(cons.r == cons.w){
    if(myproc()->killed){
      release(&cons.lock);
      return -1;
    }
    sleep(&cons.r, &cons.lock);
  }
  c = cons.buf[cons.r++ % INPUT_BUF];
  if(c == C('D')){  // end-of-file
    if(n < target){
      // Save ^D for next time, to make sure
      // caller gets a 0-byte result.
      cons.r--;
    }
    break;
  }
  // copy the input byte to the user-space buffer.
  cbuf = c;
  if(either_copyout(user_dst, dst, &cbuf, 1) == -1)
    break;
  dst++;
  --n;
  if(c == '\n'){
    // a whole line has arrived, return to
    // the user-level read().
    break;
  }
}
release(&cons.lock);
...
```

On the other hand, `consoleintr` doesn't wait for characters, since future input will raise a new interrupt. It accumulates input characters in `cons.buf` until a whole line arrives. When a new line arrives, `consoleintr` wakes up a waiting `consoleread`. 

```c
// consoleintr
...
if(c != 0 && cons.e-cons.r < INPUT_BUF){
	c = (c == '\r') ? '\n' : c;
	// echo back to the user.
  consputc(c);
  // store for consumption by consoleread().
  cons.buf[cons.e++ % INPUT_BUF] = c;
	if(c == '\n' || c == C('D') || cons.e == cons.r+INPUT_BUF){
  	// wake up consoleread() if a whole line (or end-of-file)
  	// has arrived.
    cons.w = cons.e;
    wakeup(&cons.r);
  }
}
...
```

Once woken, `consoleread` will observe a full line in `cons.buf`.

## 5.2 Code: Console output

The device driver maintains an output buffer `uart_tx_buf` so that writing processes do not have to wait for the UART to finish sending. 

`uartputc` appends a character to the buffer and calls `uartstart` to start the device transmitting (if it isn't already). 

```c
// uartputc
...
while(1){
	if(uart_tx_w == uart_tx_r + UART_TX_BUF_SIZE){
  	// buffer is full.
  	// wait for uartstart() to open up space in the buffer.
  	sleep(&uart_tx_r, &uart_tx_lock);
  } else {
    uart_tx_buf[uart_tx_w % UART_TX_BUF_SIZE] = c;
    uart_tx_w += 1;
    uartstart();
    release(&uart_tx_lock);
    return;
  }
}
...
```

Each time the UART finishes sending a byte, it generates an interrupt. `uartintr` calls `uartstart`, which checks that the device really has finished sending, and hands the device the next buffered output character. 

```c
// uartstart
...
while(1) {
  if(uart_tx_w == uart_tx_r){
    // transmit buffer is empty.
    return;
  }
  if((ReadReg(LSR) & LSR_TX_IDLE) == 0){
    // the UART transmit holding register is full,
    // so we cannot give it another byte.
    // it will interrupt when it's ready for a new byte.
    return;
  }
  int c = uart_tx_buf[uart_tx_r % UART_TX_BUF_SIZE];
  uart_tx_r += 1;  
  // maybe uartputc() is waiting for space in the buffer.
  wakeup(&uart_tx_r);
  WriteReg(THR, c);
}
...
```

Thus if a process writes multiple bytes to the console, typically the first byte will be sent by `uartputc`'s call to `uartstart`, and the remaining buffered bytes will be sent by `uartstart` calls from `uartintr` as transmit complete interrupts arrive.

A general pattern to note is the decoupling of device activity from process activity via buffering and interrupts. Processes can send output without having to wait for the device. It is particularly important when the device is slow (as with the UART) or needs immediate attention (as with echoing typed characters). This idea is sometimes called *I/O concurrency*.

## 5.5 Real world

The UART driver retrieves data a byte at a time by reading the UART control registers. This pattern is called *programmed I/O*, since the software drives the data movement. 

Devices that need to move a lot of data at a high speed typically use *direct memory access (DMA)*. DMA device hardware directly writes incoming data to RAM, and reads outgoing data from RAM.

Interrupts make sense when a device needs attentions at unpredictable times. But interrupts have high CPU overhead. Thus high speed device use tricks that reduce the need for interrupts. Here are two possible solutions:

- Raise a single interrupt for a whole batch of incoming and outgoing requests.
- Disable interrupts entirely. Use *polling* to check the device periodically. 

Polling makes sense if the device performs operations very quickly, but waste CPU time if the device is mostly idle. Hybrid approach can be applied such as switching between polling and interrupts base on the current device load.

